we start with global trade and the news
that one in five commercial ships are
now avoiding the Red Sea because of the
threat of attack that's according to the
international chamber of shipping it
includes ships operated by two of the
world's biggest shipping firms meis and
hapag Lloyd later today the UN Security
Council is expected to meet and produce
a diplomatic response the Red Sea
accounts for 15% of the world shipping
and plays a crucial part in the global
supply chain you UK companies have been
telling the BBC that shipping delays
could push up prices well let's speak
now to T fber who's the CEO of freightos
an online Marketplace for the
international shipping industry base in
Israel uh thank you very much for being
with us today Mr shriber um one in five
commercial ships avoiding the area now
some might say it doesn't sound that
dramatic one in5 is
this well yes it's hugely dramatic to
put it in context there's a about 4 and
a half million 20ft containers
equivalent going back and forth through
the seers canal um and daily this is
changing you know um there's a couple of
days of quiet and they start getting
rooted through the SE Canal again and
then there's a a rocket or an attack and
ships are either being told to stop and
wait or they're being sent back to go
and circumvent all of Africa which takes
an extra couple of weeks um so this is a
a huge um issue for for world trade and
vast numbers of goods which are being
delayed and um rerouted you know dayto
day sure so there was a big attack over
the weekend on a m MK ship which uh
houie Rebels from Yemen tried to board
and it also provoked or brought about I
would say probably the most dramatic
response so far the US Navy defended The
Vessel sank the boats of the attackers
is there a chance that that dramatic
response itself could uh stem the stem
these
tax I think not immediately uh in fact
musk had just suspended um sailings
through the Red Sea and then they just
reinstated that and then this attack
happened and so they've suspended them
again uh and I'm sure they'll be uh
cautious before uh rerooting it so of
course people are are watching uh the
news and the uh response of the American
Le Coalition uh but but it won't take
you know it won't take just one
Counterattack to make the make the
carriers feel confident they're going to
be watching this for several days or
even weeks before they feel safe to send
their Crews back through the SE Canal H
clearly this is creating headaches for
people like you in the industry but for
ordinary consumers at home there are
warnings of of of price Rises um what do
you think Could Happen what could the
consequence be for ordinary consumers so
that's also evolving uh rapidly let's
talk about prices and let's talk about
supply shortages uh in terms of prices
um our freightos terminal tracks the the
prices and our fbx11 index before New
Year had shown prices jump on the sewers
route uh from $1,200 to $1,600 that's a
30% increase which may sound like a lot
but in our industry it's a very volatile
industry that's not considered a very
dramatic uh increase but over the New
Year prices shut up to over
$4,000 uh we'll see if that will stick
or not but that's already a substantial
a price increase and you could see a
little bit of that passed on to
Consumers if the prices stay so High um
in terms though of prices and Supply
it's worth pointing out that fortunately
we're after the holiday season so the
peak season of shipping of course is is
the leadup to uh Christmas and
Thanksgiving in the US uh that is passed
and in general the network has got spare
capacity now unlike during covid uh the
last time the SE Canal was blocked in
March 2021 uh there was a big shortage
of of shipping capacity uh there is over
shipping capacity right now sure so the
network is able to better um cope so we
will see some delays and some price
increase but we're not expecting okay
anything nearly as dramatic as we saw
during covid hopefully great stuff T
fber from freightos thank you very much
for joining us with us